.. _Translations:

I18n (Internationalisation)
===========================

AppKernel's translation support is built on `Babel`_.  Strings that need to be
internationalised are marked with a ``_()`` function, which Babel extracts into
``.pot`` / ``.po`` files for translators.

.. _Babel: https://babel.pocoo.org/

How it works
------------

``AppKernelEngine`` sets up a ``LocaleMiddleware`` at startup.  On every
request it reads the ``Accept-Language`` header, selects the best match from
the languages configured in ``cfg.yml``, and swaps in the corresponding Babel
``Translations`` catalog for the duration of that request.  Any translatable
string evaluated during request handling — validation error messages, field
labels, service exceptions — is looked up in that catalog automatically.

There is nothing extra to wire up per-route.  The middleware handles it.

Marking strings for translation
--------------------------------

AppKernel exposes its internal translation function as ``_translate``.  Import
it and alias it to ``_`` in modules that raise user-facing messages::

    from appkernel.model import _translate as _

    def validate(self):
        if len(self.customer_id) < 16:
            raise ValidationException(_('Card number must be at least 16 characters.'))

For strings that must be evaluated lazily — class-level attributes, module-level
constants, or anything resolved before a request starts — use ``lazy_gettext``
instead::

    from appkernel.model import lazy_gettext

    class Payment(Model):
        HINT = lazy_gettext('Enter your 16-digit card number.')

``lazy_gettext`` wraps the string in a ``babel.support.LazyProxy`` so it is
only translated when it is actually rendered, at which point the correct locale
is already active.

You can add translator notes as inline comments directly above the marked
string — Babel will include them in the ``.pot`` file alongside the string::

    # NOTE: Shown when card validation fails.
    raise ValidationException(_('Card number must be at least 16 characters.'))

Configuration
-------------

Languages
.........

List the languages your service supports in ``cfg.yml``::

    appkernel:
      i18n:
        languages: ['en-US', 'de-DE']

AppKernel automatically expands ``en-US`` to also accept bare ``en``, so you
don't need to list both.  The first entry is not treated as a special fallback —
matching falls through to the next language in the list if no catalog is found.

Translations directory
......................

At startup, AppKernel searches for a ``translations/`` directory in three
locations (in order) relative to ``cfg_dir``::

    <cfg_dir>/translations/
    <cfg_dir>/tests/translations/
    <parent of cfg_dir>/translations/

The first existing directory wins.  If none is found, translation is silently
disabled and all ``_()`` calls return the original string unchanged.

babel.cfg
.........

Create a ``babel.cfg`` file at the root of your project to tell Babel which
files to scan::

    [model_messages: **.py]
    extract_messages = _

    [python: **.py]
    encoding = utf-8

The ``model_messages`` section uses AppKernel's custom extractor (registered
via the ``babel.extractors`` entry point in ``pyproject.toml``).  It scans
``Model`` subclasses and emits a translatable label for every declared field
(e.g. ``User.name``, ``User.email``).  These labels are used by the ``/meta``
endpoint for frontend UI rendering.  The ``python`` section covers ordinary
``_()`` calls everywhere else.

.. note::
    The custom extractor targets the legacy ``Parameter()`` declaration style.
    Fields declared with the modern ``Annotated[]`` syntax have their labels
    auto-generated by ``lazy_gettext`` inside ``AppKernelMeta`` and will appear
    in the catalog only if you run ``pybabel extract`` after the app has been
    imported (so the metaclass has processed the annotations).

Generating translation files
-----------------------------

With ``babel.cfg`` in place, run the following commands from your project root::

    pybabel extract -F babel.cfg -k _ -o messages.pot .
    pybabel init -i messages.pot -d ./translations -l en
    pybabel init -i messages.pot -d ./translations -l de
    pybabel compile -d ./translations

``extract`` writes every marked string into ``messages.pot``.
``init`` creates per-language ``.po`` files under ``translations/``.
Edit those files to provide the actual translations, then ``compile``
produces the binary ``.mo`` files that Babel loads at runtime.

Updating translation files
---------------------------

When you add new translatable strings, re-extract and merge without losing
existing translations::

    pybabel extract -F babel.cfg -k _ -o messages.pot .
    pybabel update -i messages.pot -d ./translations
    pybabel compile -d ./translations

``update`` merges new strings into the existing ``.po`` files and marks
removed strings as obsolete, so nothing is lost.
